You might see some
bodybuilders intentionally flaring their
elbows and what that does. So flaring
the elbows creates so if you think of
the attachment points of the pecs it's
like the sternum and clavicle. Clavicle
is your your collarbone. So from here to
the front of the arm here and when you
flare the elbows more and more it
increases the length of that muscle or
increases the stretch of the pec. So if
you want to target the pec in the fully
stretched position flare the elbows
more. Right? But something that you
always need to consider is the balance
between loadability and positioning for
hypertrophy. Hey guys, today I'm going
to be benching and I'm going to be doing
something a little bit different. If
you've been following, you'll know that
I injured myself 2 days ago um doing a
heavy squat. Now, bit of feedback on on
what's happening. That night was very
sore. I often say don't do anything in
the first 24 hours, which I did not. And
it got progressively more and more sore
overnight. but then woke up the next day
and it started getting a little bit
better. So, it's not good enough for me
to be loading. Um, I'm still kind of
limping a little bit. And I would say
this week I'm going to do zero on it.
Uh, it's still only been 2 days, so uh,
early days. And I'll know more as every
day progresses. Either way, we're doing
bench. Now, here's the next thing. Um,
I'm going to talk to you guys about de
loing strategies. And the reason why I
want to talk about that is because I
needed a D lo and I didn't do it. and I
just kept on going heavier and heavier
and heavier. So, there's two different
types of strategies with D losses.
There's proactive D losses and reactive
D loads. So, right now I'm doing a
reactive D load. And typically I
recommend proactive D load. So, I like
to go, you know, four weekly programs.
And on the fourth week, I like to plan a
bit of a D lo, which I kind of did by
reducing the volume, but I was going
really, really heavy and I just kept on
going heavier and heavier and heavier.
Uh, and then something popped. So, um,
I'm going to be listening to my body.
Now, if you followed my last bench press
session, I was complaining a little bit
about tightness on my pec. Um, I'm due
for, you know, testing over 200 kg for a
set of two today. But listening to my
body with that little mishap on my quad,
I don't want the same thing to happen to
my pec. So, what I'm going to be doing
is giving myself a small phase of
recovery for my entire body. So, I'm
going to put myself through, I guess you
could call it a hypertrophy block where
I'm focusing on lighter loads, slightly
higher reps. So, I'm still going to be
training hard and I believe after a
small phase of this, I'm not going to
get weaker. Um, but the objective is to
come
back recovered, recovered, painfree.
Right? So, so right now, um, I'm going
to be doing bench press still. Um, but
the type of bench press that I'm going
to be doing is a bodybuilding style
bench press. One where it's less levers,
less arch, and more focused on the exact
muscle. So, that's what I'm going to be
going through today. Um, the rep range
is going to be sets of eight. Now, the
good thing about sets of eight is you
can't go super heavy. So, the heavier
the weight, the higher the risk of
injury, to put it really, really simply,
uh, even if you're using really good
technique. So, what I'm going to be
doing is sets of eight with a mid grip
and minimizing the arch. The reason why
I'm doing that is increased range of
motion, which makes it harder to lift as
heavy, but it's very good for building
muscle. And if I do a phase of that, I
think I can get uh the same type of
stimulus to slowly or at least maintain
strength. Um, but you know, come out
after about a 3 week phase of this and I
don't think I will have lost strength.
So, that's what we're going to be doing.
The plan today is three sets of eight on
145 kg. And just like I do with my
powerlifting style technique, I teach
you guys the techniques. I'm going to
teach you the techniques that I use for
a bodybuilding style bench press. So,
for those of you at home, uh some people
look at me doing an arch and think
that's cheating. What's the point of
doing that? Well, the point of doing
that is so that you can lift as heavy in
a powerlifting competition, which is the
goal is to lift the most weight for one
rep. But if your goal is to build
muscle, you want to be less efficient.
So using an arch and a wide grip is
being more efficient. It's a shorter
range of motion. Uh for a bodybuilder,
you don't want to be efficient. You want
to be less efficient so the muscles do
more of the work and that's going to
cause me to lift a lighter weight, which
is totally fine. So anyway, have a look
at what I'm going to be doing. The way
that I set up is no arch. So I'm just
going to go flat feet.
Now, my mid grip. So, my wide grip is
index finger on the outer ring of a
powerlifting bar. My mid grip, I'm just
going to go pinky on that same
line. So, I don't do the exaggerated
arch, but I still want to pick my chest
up. The reason why I pick my chest up is
because the pecs attach to the sternum.
So, a large portion attaches sternum and
clavicle. So, what you want to do is
pull the sternum up high and pull my
shoulder back, which creates tension on
the peg. So, it's not the same degree of
arch in a powerlifting competition, but
I still recommend whenever you're doing
a bench press um for pec development,
you want to create more tension on the
muscle by that's the cue, chest up. So,
picking that chest up and pulling the
shoulders back slightly. So, that's what
I'm going to be doing.
Okay. So, I will probably do a light
pause as well. And I'm going to be going
up in 20 kg jumps for my warm up. So
that's 65 20 kg jumps and my working
weight is going to be 145 kg. The next
thing I'm going to be doing is I will be
alternating because I'm not going so
heavy. I will be alternating between
push and pull. So whenever I'm going
super super heavy, I do my bench press
and I sit and wait about 8 to 10
minutes. Now,
um, I'm going to do my bench press,
maybe wait three minutes, three to four
minutes, and then do lat pull down so I
get twice the amount of work in the same
amount of
time. And I'm going to be doing lat pull
down. You guys probably see that I do
this a lot. An alternative to this could
be some type of row variation, but I've
chosen a lat pull down cuz it takes my
legs out of the equation more. When I do
the row, I need to stabilize a little
bit harder with my leg. And right now,
while I've got that little quadricep
pain, um I just want to take all of the
pain out of the equation and just work
my muscles.
How's it been? Feels okay.
um I feel my pec working more which is
the idea of it right this is a
bodybuilding style bench press or at
least I should say it's the way that I
would bench press if I was a bodybuilder
now let's talk about some of the
differences so in powerlifting um the
idea is not really to use pecs of course
using pecs but the idea is to use spread
the load as evenly as possible amongst
all of your pushing muscles so you got
pecs deltoids and triceps so I want to
use all of it and you want to use the
muscle in its strongest position. So the
strongest position for any muscle is
putting it in its midstretch position.
So when it's fully stretched, it's
weaker. And when it's fully contracted,
it's weaker. Right? When it's in its
mid-range, that's when it has the
greatest contractile strength. So that's
where we're positioning our pec in a
powerlifting competition so that we're
using the mid-range. Now, here's the
difference with powerlift. Sorry, with
bodybuilding.
There's a lot of discussion on the
benefits of targeting the muscle in the
fully lengthened position for greater
hypertrophy results. Right? So therefore
you might see some
bodybuilders intentionally flaring their
elbows and what that does. So flaring
the elbows creates so if you think of
the attachment points of the pecs it's
like the sternum and clavicle. Clavicle
is your your collarbone. So from here to
the front of the arm here. And when you
flare the elbows more and more, it
increases the length of that muscle or
increases the stretch of the pec. So if
you want to target the pec in a fully
stretched position, flare the elbows
more. Right? But something that you
always need to consider is the balance
between loadability and positioning for
hypertrophy. So the problem with putting
in the greater stretch position is it's
not as strong. Right? So here's the
thing. Even as a bodybuilder, I still
want to position my muscles in the
strongest contractile length. So this is
my recommendation is slight tuck of the
elbows. So in a powerlifting
competition, we tuck the elbows so that
we can evenly distribute the load across
all the muscles and put the pec in its
mid-range. But as a bodybuilder, people
have an option, right? So you might see
people flare the elbows and that is a
great way of strengthening the pec in
the in the lengthen position. But for me
today, like I I think either or is good.
So like full stretch, so flared elbows
is good, but you can't lift as heavy.
Mid-range is good and you can lift
heavier. So which one's going to place
more um mechanical tension on the pec?
So mechanical tension is what we're
after for muscle growth. Which one's
going to place more mechanical tension?
Lighter weight with a greater stretch or
less or more weight with lesser of a
stretch? I'm going to go with my
strength bias and go put the peg in the
mid-range and press a little bit more.
So that's um little bit of a
biomechanics and anatomy lesson. Uh
either of them are right depending on
what you can justify. All right. So lat
pull down. The way that I like to do it,
there's a few different ways. They're
all very similar. The way that I like to
do is I like to focus on not just lats,
but also my midback muscles as well. And
the way that I do it is I think about
pulling the bar down of course, but
pulling my shoulder blades back and down
towards my back pockets. So there's
another way of doing it, which is so
right now I'm thinking elbows. So
shoulder blades back and down. That's my
end position. Another way of thinking
about it is this is a different cue.
Elbows straight down towards the ground.
So watch the difference. It's very
subtle. So this is where I get complete
development of my whole upper back. So
lats and midback muscles as well.
Shoulder blades back and down. Now this
is how I would position my body if I was
to target lats by themselves is elbows
down. So if you if you look at the
position, my elbows aren't crossing the
midline of my body. So the moment I
cross them with the midline of my body,
cross the elbows from the midline of my
body, I'm recruiting midback muscles and
unloading the lats very slightly. So if
I wanted to purely target lats, elbow
straight down. If I want to do lats and
midback, lean back just a little bit
more and think about the queue.
Shoulders back and down towards the back
pockets. A little bit more like a row
back. Exactly. So it's it's like a
vertical row vertical row position. Um
yeah, some people I've seen um a lot of
highle bodybuilders, they really
emphasize not not just that downwards
position but also being completely
vertical. So the more vertical you are,
the more you're taking your midback
muscles out of the equation.
So elbows in line with the midline of
your torso and being as upright as
possible. That's how I would do it if I
was really focusing on on
lats. Great exercise for lats, but I
want lats as well as midback. You know,
as a powerlifter, midback muscles are
pretty important. So, it's about balance
when it when it comes to powerlifting.
So, I don't push or deadlift or anything
with those midback muscles. It's about
having muscles supporting your joints.
So, the main muscles for pushing is pecs
and deltoids and triceps, but having
strong opposing muscles is good for
joint health. Uh, and that's a huge part
of being a good powerlifter is not being
injured because look at me now. While
I'm injured, I can't lift heavy, right?
So the goal of powerlifting, a lot of
people think, I don't want to lift heavy
because it's, you know, high risk of
injury. Well, that's why we need to
factor in how do we keep our joints and
our body as healthy as possible so we
can stick it out for the long game. Uh
anyhow, so that's uh the two exercises
that I'm going to be doing. Um did I do
105 yet? No, I didn't. I'm going to do
that now.
Notice my feet are flat. When I do my
powerlifting style, I bring my feet back
and push my heels down. That cranks my
arch. I don't need to do that now. I
have my feet flat so that I'm creating a
more stable base of support so that I'm
balanced, so that I can push as much
weight as possible.
warm up. Last warm up. It's feeling
really easy because, you know, my last
session, my easy day was 175 kg. That
was my light day. So, you know, and then
heavy day was, you know, around the 200
kg mark. So, now that I'm going for 145,
it's just like mentally, that's another
good part about changing phases now. Um,
just
mentally it's just so easy. Uh, whenever
I'm training for a heavy session, for
any body part, but it's stressful. I
love the stress, don't get me wrong.
It's nice to put yourself under a bit of
pressure. Give you a reason to step up
for the day. Um, but it is stressful. So
now it's just like what a that's my last
warm up. Felt like it was quite easy and
I think that all of this is going to
feel quite easy, but you know, the body
needs that from time to time. So anyway,
back on the topic of D loads. This is
now a different type of de lo to what
I'd recommend. So D load is usually like
one week of some type of unloading. I'm
giving myself an entire phase. And the
reason why I'm giving myself an entire
phase, that's how long I anticipate this
is going to take to recover. So I think
it's going to be a couple of weeks um
before I can, you know, start to squat
properly with this. I'm hoping anyway.
It could be longer, but um I I reckon
after about 3 weeks, you'll see me back
squatting. Um not heavy like that, but
I'll be squatting anyway. So, this is um
very very chilled. And the next couple
of weeks, I dare say it's going to be
chilled like
this. Speaking about like not taking
things like the lat pull down to failure
because it affects how you move. What
back exercises would you recommend
taking to failure? Um or would you not?
Look, the thing is when you I mean
context matters. So the more advanced
the lifter are the better you are at
moving, right? So a lot of beginners
taking that movement to failure, they
start to break down in technique and
they start to if you see things like
rounding of shoulders, that's when the
target muscles aren't working anymore.
So when your shoulders are rounding,
that means you're not pulling your
shoulder blades together. So back and
down. So your mid whenever you're doing
this action, your midback muscles aren't
working anymore. So quite often they're
the weaker link and you know more
beginner lifters will will break down
their technique like that. And if that's
you, that's when I don't recommend going
to fail. Well, you're going to it's
called mechanical fail. So going to fail
is when you can't complete another rep.
Going to mechanical fail is where you
can't complete another rep with good
technique. Right? So I don't care to be
so rigid about it. So, a lot of people
say you're going to injure yourself.
You're not. So, if you do sets of like
12 reps on all that pull down and the
last couple of reps you're doing that,
you're not going to injure yourself.
It's too light. Uh, and you're not
strong enough to be lifting a weight
that's heavy enough. But, you're also
not targeting the the muscles that we
want to target, which is the midback
muscles. Now, I believe that I have the
control to be able to take it to the
point where I can tell when those
muscles aren't working anymore, and I
don't like let myself get to that
position. So, I think that's the context
that that needs to be applied here with
the back movements. I never recommend
you take the movement to that, you know,
that rounded shoulders thing cuz that's
where you're not hitting your midback.
And in my opinion, that's most people's
weak points, right? So, so there's the
answer to that question. Mechanical fail
is what I'm after. That means your
ability to complete a repetition with
good technique. You can't do that.
Therefore, the set is ended.
very easy.
Yeah, you know, arguably too
easy. But here's the strategy. That's
week one of the program. So that's what
I didn't do yesterday. So or two days
ago when I did my squats. my week one of
the squat program, I started too heavy.
Uh, so this is supposed to be easy to
allow room for progression from week to
week. So 145. If I do this program for 4
weeks, that'll end me on 160 for eight.
So right now, if I was to be able to do
160 for eight now with that position,
I'd be pretty happy. And I don't think I
would, but who knows? We'll see in 4
weeks.
[Music]
Easy. Easy but hard.
like compared to powerlifting, bench
press, it's like a really nice lever and
everything comes up a lot faster. This
one, it's a slightly longer range of
motion. Um, it's just a different feel,
but yeah, still very easy. I think I
could have really done 10 kg more today.
So, 155 for eights. I don't think 160,
but I think in a few weeks I will be
doing 160. One more set.
What?
Happy or sad?
Neither. you know, like I'm happy that I
didn't have to work that hard for the
day. Um sad that I was uh not able to do
my 200s, but it's how it goes. I know
it's uh it's going to be a good thing.
So, everything that I'm doing now is
about recovery. So, that includes yeah,
my training. I'm doing lighter loads and
kind of, you know, unloading my body,
still working
hard, but I'm going to focus on
nutrition as well. So something that I
was doing for my big heavy days is
having huge desserts the night before
and actually I stepped on the scales and
I put on 3 1/2 kg kind of in the last 2
weeks. That's too fast. Doesn't seem
like a lot but you know I don't want to
do that. I want to stay lean. So now
it's my opportunity to say I don't have
any big days to you like carb up or fuel
up the day before. Um, so that's what
I'm going to be doing is focusing on
good nutrition. I want to get lean, you
know, focus on my health. I'll do a
little bit of cardio, not much, so that
when I do come back, when the injury's
gone, um, yeah, hopefully it's, uh,
it'll be a very, very quick recovery.
Anyway, um, we're going to do some
accessories now.
So technique I was using was slightly
neutral but not as neutral as I normally
would. So what I'm doing now with the
dumbbell press
is flaring for me. So a lot of people
they go completely pronated. I'm a
little bit tucked but not as tucked as
usual. So the idea of what I just did
then 55 kg for eight
reps, I think I did 60 kg for 10 on the
flat a couple of weeks ago. So my
strength is more than that. But if you
notice, I was kind of like stretch pause
like really
controlled and I'm not just banging it.
So it's a little bit harder but that's
fine. Everything is unloading my body
slightly lighter but still maximum
stimulus on the muscle. Next up I'm
going to do a one arm dumbbell row. So
this
exercise I quite like. I'm not as strong
on my pulls as I am with my push. That's
okay. So rules with unilateral loading
is weaker side first. So for me that's
my left side. What I like to do here is
look at my base of support. It's quite
wide and stable, right? And I like to
use good technique. I like to have a
small pause at the top so it's not just
just ripping it, which I see a lot of
people doing.
[Music]
One more set of those and then I'm going
to move on to arms. Next up, we're going
to be doing arms. Uh, that's something
that I have noticed is my arm work. I've
been neglecting it. So, I want to bring
that back. My favorite exercises for
arms. I'm going to superset them back
and forth. So, starting with, of course,
the skull press. That's my favorite arm,
favorite tricep exercise, uh, with an
easy bar. You can do it with dumbbells,
but I'm doing it with an easy bar
because it's more
loadable. All right.
[Music]
What part of the tricep are you?
So, here's the
thing. All heads of the tricep.
A lot of people say it's a long head
exercise, right? Um because we're
positioning the arm overhead and it
creates tension on the long head of the
triceps, which is true, and it does hit
the long head. But there is no elbow
extension exercise you can do that takes
the medial and lateral heads out. So, it
actually hits all heads. The pressing
compound neglects the long head, right?
Right? So, if all you do is compound
like bench pressing and shoulder
pressing, compound pressing, you're
taking out the big head down here. So,
if you want complete triceps
development, you need to isolate. So,
that's my favorite exercise to make sure
I'm targeting all heads. And I've just
in my time, like 20 years of training,
I've just found I always just get the
best response from that. So, that's my
favorite. That's my go-to.
Next, I've I'm keeping this on cuz I've
got the mic on here. Um, the next one
I'm going to do some bicep curls. I'm
going to be doing Zotman curls. So,
Zotman curls, one of my favorite bang
for your buck bicep exercises because it
targets all heads of the elbow flexors,
right? So, elbow flexes aren't just
biceps. So, you've got the bicep, which
is, you know, the one that you see this
normally big on big guys, but on me, I
don't have a big one of those. Bicep.
underneath that is the brachiialis and
then over here is the this muscle here
that's like forearm muscle is the
brachio radiialis right so those are the
three main elbow flexors and they all
work when we change the wrist position
so if you want to hit
biceps you need to supernate your hands
so what does supenate mean hold soup so
that's supernate that's pronate so look
at the shape of my bicep when I supenate
that engages the bicep when I pronate it
relaxes the bicep and allows me to
expose the brachio radiialis and also
the brachiialis uh against gravity. So
those are the whenever I pronate my
wrist, it turns the bicep off and it
hits more of the brachialis and brachio
radiialis. But a Zman curl, I'm not
going to put this back on. A Zman curl
does all of it.
Watch. So we do supernation on the
concentric and then we pronate and then
we lower it under control for the
eentric because we're weaker with
pronated wrist. So that's why we use the
concentric when
we're in the supernated position because
it'll be too hard to do the concentric
this way. Oh, that's I mean it can be
done but when I get in fatigue state
it's a lot harder. Supernate for the
concentric, pronate for the eentric.
That is a Zman curl and it is a very
complete elbow
flexor. Thank you. Thank you. Um, so I'm
going to do another set of that. So
that's my entire workout. Um, that's
pretty good um volume and I'm sweating
and I'm breathing hard and all that, but
it's not as overall fatiguing as my
super heavy session. So feel great after
that. That's my upper body hypertrophy
session. If you're a bodybuilder at
home, train this way. It's great
feeling. Party pump. It's Friday and you
want a party pump for the weekend. That
was my rehabilitation session. rehabbing
a muscle that haven't haven't torn yet,
which is my pec. Either way, that's
going to be three weeks of kind of like
hypertrophy style training. So, for my
bodybuilding following out there, if I
do have any of them, this is a really
great session for pec development and
also back and arms and entire upper
body. Hope you enjoyed this session and
I'll see you guys next